@def title = "Monte Carlo Methods"


I became interested in markov chain monte carlo (MCMC) methods. I have a Statistics degree and 
a Computer Science degree, however, neither degree offered courses on MCMC. The more I learn about them, 
the more I understand how they blur the lines between Stats and CS. 

What are they? Monte Carlo methods use random sampling to make statistical estimates. That's pretty vague, but stick 
with me. It's all about making random samples, but you have to be smart about it. Where are you sampling from? 
What samples should be included in your sample statistics? How do you generate efficient samples? If you would 
like to explore an area of a particularly difficult density function, you don't want to make all of your samples
in one corner of the density. 


Wolfram Alpha is a great resource. It's an easy interface for some quick calculations. If weren't sure
what the intergal of a standard normal distribution from -1.96 to 1.96 was, we could put it in Wolfram Alpha:

```
integrate e^(-x^2/2)/sqrt(2 pi) dx from -1.96 to 1.96
```

Or in R, we could define a standard normal density function (or use dnorm for simplicity), and use 
R's `intergate` function:

```
my_std_normal <- function(x) {  
  exp(-x^2/2)/sqrt(2*pi)
}
```

Standard normal


One of the simplest examples, is to estimate pi. $$\pi$$ is used in the formula for the area of a circle ($$Area = \pi * radius^2$$). Since we're really just interested in pi, we can choose a simple circle to work with and find its area. By the formula, a circle with a radius of 1 will give an area of of just $$\pi$$. 

Now, if we place this circle in a square so that it inscribes the square (centered at 0,0), the square would have to be a 2 by 2 square (since the radius of our circle was 1). So the square would range from -1 to 1 in both the x and y axes.

With this setup, we can start using monte carlo to estimate pi. To use monte carlo, we simply sample numbers. In this case, we can sample numbers between 0 and 1 (using a simple random number generator found in most programming languages). Suppose we do this a thousand times for the positive side and a thousand times for the negative side. If we keep track of all the points samples, we can record the number within the circle ($$x^2 + y^2 < 1$$). So, if we pretend we don't know the formula for the area of a circle, we could say that it is 

